Objective:- Assignments will help trainees to understand the basics of unix command and how to explore and use it.

DO NOT copy paste commands from internet, you can take help of the Unix in-built command manual.

Be Honest to yourself!

Important command and option to learn unix commands:-
man Command
Example:-
man ls

--help Option
Example:-
ls --help

NOTE:- Always use "man" command before using any unix commands and read about it and its options and how to use it.

Assignments:-

List the contents of a directory and their attributes
ls command

Long list the content with file, directory ownership, permissions,sizes, etc…
ls -l command

Display the size of the file in human readable format
la -h

Show all files and folders including hidden one
ls -a

list directories recursively
ls -R

Sort the files by size with largest at the top
ls -S

Sort the files by last time modified displaying the newest first.
ls -t

Diplay the location of a program/command, where it is installed.

Which command is used to switch directory from one to another
cd command

List all the environment variables set for the current shell environment
env command

Did you notice something in the output of "env" command?
all info about the system

Which command is used to print the text or any variables value in the Console/Terminal?
echo

Print the value of the env variable "PATH" on the console
echo $PATH

Is linux a case-sensitive operating system?
yes linux is case sensitive

Is, "Ls" same as "ls"?
No

Display your currently logged in user
w command

how do you change the currrently logged in user to another user?
$ su - user2
followed by user2 password

Which command is used to leave a shell environment that you are currently logged in to?
Exit command

How do you reboot the system?
sudo reboot

How do you shutdown the system?
sudo shutdown

Display all the major running processes in the system
ps command

Understand the output of command used in above question of displaying processes, explain the meaning of each column and what data it displays?
PID is process ID
TTY is terminal type
TIME is amount of cpu usage
CMD is name of command which launched the process


Display the name of the system kernel
uname -s

display the kernel release number
uname -r

display the machine type of the current kernel
uname -m

Display the name of the operating system that the kernel is running on
uname -o

Display all info that uname command can show.
uname -a

Display the name of directory that you are currently pointing to
pwd command

change the current directory to another directory that you have in your system.
using cd command

Go up one directory
cd ..

Return to last directory
cd -

change the current directory to home(logged in user's) directory
cd command


How to check all the command used from the prompt (Command History)
history command

In which file the history of commands are stored in?
.bash_history

How many lines of history does the system keep and from where you can change it?
by default it stores 1000 lines in $HISTSIZE and you can change it by using  HISTSIZE=5000(new number)

How can you modify bash's history behaviour
using PROMPT_COMMAND command

Display all the commands entered so far, now, try to run a particular command from the history list without typing that command.
history command to list , and up and down arrow to navigate and choose any command

NOTE:- TAB key is your friend when it comes to command completion and having long file and directory names autocompleted at the bash prompt for you. JUST BE LAZY AND USE TAB KEY FOR AUTO COMPLETION ;-)

What are the different types of shell and where are they used and how do we use them?
different shells are C-shell, Bourne shell, korn shell and bourne again shell
we use them for essential computer operations, and provides the restriction to hardware access, coordinates all executing utilities, and manages Resources between process

What is the difference between login shell and non-login shell?
A Login shell is created after a successful login of user. For example, when you login t a Linux system via terminal, SSH or switch to user with “su -” command.
Non Login Shell is the shell, which is started by the login shell. For example, A shell which you started from another shell or started by a program etc.

How do we start login shell and non-login shell?
To start login shell
-Press the menu button in the top-right corner of the window and select Preferences.
-In the sidebar, select your current profile in the Profiles section.
-Select Command.
-Under the Command label, select Run command as a login shell.

To start a non-login shell 
-we type the name of the shell executable, bash, in our case.
-We execute the echo $0 command again to see what type of shell the newly started shell is; the output of the echo command is bash without the -. 
-It means the new shell is a non-login shell.



What happens when you start a login shell (which files are read and used and Why)?
It reads and executes commands from the file /etc/profile.



What happens when you start a non-login shell (Which files are read and used and Why)?
It reads and executes commands from ~/. bashrc.


What are Shell Configuration Files, why do we need it?
Shell configuration files are executed automatically when you log in and out of a shell. They initialize and configure a shell upon login and perform cleanup operations upon logout.


Explain the Order of file usage from the system/user's home directory when user logs in to the System.

What are Shell Variables, list major shell variables and what do they represent?
A shell variable is a special variable that is set by the shell and is required by the shell in order to function correctly


How we see all our env variables?
By env command

How we see all env variables in alphabical order?
By env | sort command

What Format does the env var and its values are stored?

How do you create your own variable?
You can set your own variables at the command line per session, or make them permanent by placing them into the ~/. bashrc file, ~/. profile.

How do you start a new bash shell?
-Go to Run (Press Windows + R key),
-Type cmd to open command prompt.
-Now type bash.


Difference between Local/Shell variables to Global Variable
Local variable is declared inside a function whereas Global variable is declared outside the function.


Making a variable accessible from other the shell in the system.
By using export

Show the real life use case of exporting a variable

0a.sh:
#!/bin/sh

MESSAGE="hello"
export MESSAGE
./b.sh

b.sh:
#!/bin/sh

echo "The message is: $MESSAGE"




What is Globbing? Explain in depth with examples?
The Bash shell feature that is used for matching or expanding specific types of patterns is called globbing. 
Globbing is mainly used to match filenames or searching for content in a file.
ex:- $ ls -l ????.txt


List all entries with extension ".sh"
$ ls -l ????.sh


List all entries with numbers in it.
$ ls -l [0-9]*

List all entries that starts with a character and ends with a number

List all entries that name length more than 5 characters
ls -d /?????

What is Quoting? and Why do we need it?
Quoting is used to remove the special meaning of certain characters or words to the shell. Quoting can be used to disable special treatment for special characters, to prevent reserved words from being recognized as such, and to prevent parameter expansion.



Write few(minimum 3) unique examples that shows, how a particular problem is solved using Quoting.
echo \<Welcome\>
echo \"Welcome\"
echo \'Welcome\'

How do you find a particular files/directories based on a particular search criteria?
HINT:- look for commands -> locate, find and whereis
find -name filename

Write major difference between locate, find and whereis?
find searches real files recursively down a given directory, 
while locate searches a database without requiring specific directory.
As for whereis, it search only inside those directories that are mentioned in your PATH variable and only those with executable permission set

How Globbing is different from locate, find and whereis?

Explain the Linux File System.
Linux file system is the collection of data and/or files stored in a computer’s hard disk or storage,
 your computer relies on this file system to ascertain the location and positioning of files in your storage

Explain absolute and Relative Paths
an absolute path refers to the same location in a file system relative to the root directory, whereas a relative path points to a specific location in a file system relative to the current directory you are working on.

What are the different ways of creating a File in linux System? Write an example of each and the difference between them.
some commands to create files are:-
touch 
cat
mv
gedit
nano
vi


In how many ways we can delete the files from linux system? write an example of each and teh difference between them.
rm filename- removes the file
rm -i filename- removes with a warning/prompt.
rm -v filename - to list what rm is doing
rm -f filename - to force remove the file


Archiving files using linux command, write a command to archive set of files from linux commands.
using tar command we can archieve files.
ex:- tar cvf filename - to create archieve file
     

Extract the archived files from the above step.
tar xvf filename - to extract files from archieve